## Isolating Feature Impacts in Educational Data Mining: Novel Metrics and Insights from Accumulated Local Effects

This thesis presents a study at the intersection of Machine Learning (ML) and education, emphasizing the application of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) techniques in Educational Data Mining (EDM). Central to this research is the challenge of providing post-hoc global explanations for ML models, especially when data independence cannot be assumed, a common yet underexplored issue in EDM. Overlooking data interdependencies can bias explanations, inflate irrelevant variables, or disproportionately attribute significance to certain predictors. To address these challenges, this work builds on Accumulated Local Effects (ALE), a recent method for post-hoc global explanation that visualizes the impact of features. ALE's pseudo-orthogonality property allows for isolating individual variable effects, distinguishing it from widely used methods in EDM, such as Partial Dependence (PD) Plots and SHapley Additive Explanations (SHAP). To showcase ALE's properties, this work introduces a new evaluation methodology to rigorously assess ALE's ability against established methods in approximating the true behavior of features across various data dependency contexts. Furthermore, this work proposes new metrics based on ALE, aimed at measuring feature impact sizes. These model-agnostic metrics are an improvement over traditional explanation scores, as they provide clearer and more accurate insights into how features affect model outcomes, including the extent and direction of their impacts. The efficacy of these metrics is demonstrated through comprehensive validation on both synthetic and real datasets, proving their effectiveness in isolating key variable effects compared to existing scores. Furthermore, the application of these metrics in an empirical study within Brazilian secondary schools not only underscores their practicality in real-world scenarios but also extends the contributions of this thesis by offering new perspectives on the determinants of educational outcomes in Brazilian secondary schools over a decade.
